---
title: "How can I bring my personal website up for free on Github without server and domain costs?"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Git
  - Jekyll
---

Well, for a few days, I hadn't posted anything and I was tinkering with the Jekyll project, which is an open-source project, to customize it to some extent.

Let me explain what the Jekyll project does and how to use it. In general, it provides us with a content management system where we can manage pages, templates, posts, etc., and the interesting point here is that it doesn't require any database!! 🧑🏻‍🦯

Since we want to use Github Pages for hosting our website and blog, we need all our files to be static. So, how do we run this content management system?! 🧑🏻‍🦯
It might be interesting, but as I mentioned, there's no database involved, and we're going to store our data in .md files 😇

Next, I'll explain how to set it up and its various parts thoroughly. Also, I customized one of the themes myself and made it public on my Github for easy deployment and launching your own website with it.

Here's the Jekyll project link:
https://jekyllrb.com/
And here's one of the most comprehensive themes developed for this project:
https://github.com/mmistakes/minimal-mistakes

Since this theme is one of the most comprehensive and customizes every page and template, you can check out the method if you want to customize it personally.

Here's the theme that I customized the UI for myself; you can easily use it:
https://github.com/aliyoob/blog

Now let's talk about how Jekyll works:
Starting from the top, this project consists of several directories and files that we'll review together.

First, in the root of the project, we have a directory named _data which contains a file named navigation.yml where we can set up the menus of our site like this:
```
main:
  - title: "Posts"
    url: /posts/
  - title: "Categories"
    url: /categories/
  - title: "Tags"
    url: /tags/
  - title: "About"
    url: /about/
    ```

Next, we have a directory named _pages where we define the pages of our site like 404, about us, contact us, etc. And any desired page we want. Note that every page we define in this section needs a new file with a .md extension. As mentioned, there's no database involved, and we're going to store our page data inside these .md files.

For example, we create the 404 page like this:
First, we create a file named 404.md in this directory, and inside this file, it should be filled like this:
```
"
---
title: "Page Not Found"
excerpt: "Page not found. Your pixels are in another canvas."
sitemap: false
permalink: /404.html
---

Sorry, but the page you were trying to view does not exist.
"
```
As you can see, the information related to this page is included. Now let's create another page and examine it, for example, the About Us page.

First, we create another file named about.md and fill it like this:
```
"
---
permalink: /about/
title: "About"
---

This paragraph just wants to tell about me and how I am such a good man!
"
```

The slug URL will be /about/ and the page title will be About.

In general, you can create your pages in a similar way to several other pages that are available in the templates I provided, which you can examine.

The next directory we work with is the _posts directory, where we create and edit our posts. It's exactly like your pages but with a little difference.
As you became familiar with this method, there's no database involved, and again, we have to publish our posts as files.

Now let's create a post together.
In this directory, I create a file; the naming format of the file should be like this:
date-name.md
For example:
```
2024-02-11-welcome-to-jekyll.md
```
And we fill this file like this:
```
"
---
title: "Welcome to Jekyll!"
date: 2024-02-11T15:34:30-04:00
categories:
  - blog
tags:
  - Jekyll
  - update
---

your first paragraph

your second paragraph
"
```
In this way, in the top section, we entered the post's information, and in the bottom section, after ---, we write the content of our post. Note that it's enough to write the content, and each line separated by an Enter will be treated as a separate paragraph, meaning each line will be placed in a separate <p> tag. 

There are examples on the GitHub project that you can check and examine.

The next important directory we have is assets/images where you can upload additional files like CSS, JS, and your images.

So far, if you were just looking to learn content management of this system, you've learned what to do. Next, we want to see how to customize the theme of this project and how to deploy it on Github Pages.

We have two other important directories. The first one is _includes, which contains some of our page templates that you can check the GitHub theme I provided to see the complete files. But here, I'll explain two important parts.

In this directory, we need to create two important files for customizing the template. One is head.html, which will be our head tag, and we should put all the information we want to be in the head tag in this file.

The next important file we're dealing with is archive-single.html, which is essentially the main page of the blog where an archive of our posts is located. You can customize it according to your needs and design.

The next important directory is _layouts, where we define the main themes of our pages. One of the important files we need to create to define template themes is default.html, which will be the default layout of all our pages. In this section, we design our template, and we just need to leave the content part of the page empty where the content of the pages will be loaded and put this: {{ content }} and from now on, all our pages will be loaded with this template, and the content of the pages will be loaded in the middle of this template that you specified.

The next important file we're dealing with is home.html, which will be the main page of your site, and you can design this page according to your needs.

The last file or the last template we're going to deal with is single.html, which will be the template of our posts.
Note that if you have created the default.html file, your posts will be loaded in the template of this file by default, but if you have also created single.html, your posts will be loaded from the template of this file.

This is an example template of a post page that you can check its content:
https://github.com/mmistakes/minimal-mistakes/blob/master/_layouts/single.html

So far, we've learned the important parts needed for managing and customizing Jekyll and now it remains to see how to deploy it.

In general, if you want a pre-customized project that has a more beautiful design, you can use the project I provided on my GitHub above this post.

But if you want to use all the features of Jekyll, it's better to use its recommended developed themes.

To deploy this project, all you need to do is create a repository first and assign a subdomain from GitHub for yourself. To do this, click on the + button at the top right of the page, then in the repository link section, first enter your GitHub username and then your github.io address. For example, for my username, I should enter this: aliyoob.github.io because my username is aliyoob.

After you have done this, you should click on this link again:
https://github.com/mmistakes/mm-github-pages-starter/generate

This link will automatically take you to the new repository creation page so that automatically deploys this project on your new repository, and all you have to do is log in through it and, for example, name your new repository blog.
Then, by entering your address username.github.io/blog, this project will be loaded for you, and through the tutorials on managing this content management system, which were fully explained above, you can use your blog.
** Note that in this section, instead of username, you should enter your GitHub username.

Good luck!