---
title: "How to Create a Git Repository with cPanel ?"
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - cPanel
  - Git
---

Perhaps you encounter situations where a client hosts their website on a shared hosting service, and you need to work on it with your team. You can utilize Git within cPanel to manage your project effectively.

Firstly, create a file named cpanel.yml at the top-level directory of your local project. The content of this file should be as follows:

```yaml
---
    deployment:
        tasks:
            - export DEPLOYPATH=/home/cpanelUserName/project/
            - /bin/cp * $DEPLOYPATH
```

Explanation of the code:
Line 1: Start of a YAML file.
Lines 2 and 3: Add the keys 'deployment' and 'tasks' respectively.
Line 4: Specifies the location to deploy the project.
Line 5: Indicates which files to copy, using '*' for all files.

Ensure to replace 'cpanelUserName' with your cPanel username.


Open your terminal and navigate to the directory of your project. Then, execute the following commands to initialize a Git repository and stage all files:
```yaml
git init
git add .
git status
```

Next, configure your Git user details:
```yaml
git config --global user.name "YourName"
git config --global user.email youremail@example.com 
```

After these setup steps, commit your changes:
```yaml
git commit -m "Initial commit"
```

Now, you need to establish a connection to a remote repository. You can use GitHub or GitLab. Use the following command to add a remote repository:
```yaml
git remote add origin https://github.com/your-repository
```

Replace 'your-repository' with the URL of your repository.


To push your files to the remote repository on GitHub:
```yaml
git push origin master
```

Now that you've connected your local Git repository to GitHub, you need to link GitHub to cPanel. This allows cPanel to clone your repository.

In cPanel, navigate to Git™ Version Control under the Files section. Click on "Create". Make sure "Clone a Repository" is selected.

Enter the GitHub repository URL in the first field.

The Repository Path field will auto-populate. The Repository Name is the directory name for your repository.

Click "Create".

Now, if you go to the File Manager on your hosting, you'll see a folder named 'repository' with all your GitHub repository files cloned inside it.

Finally, every time you make changes, go back to cPanel, navigate to Git™ Version Control, and click on "Manage" for your repository. Under the "Pull or Deploy" tab, click "Update from remote" and then "Deploy HEAD Commit" to apply changes to your cPanel.

Note: You need to repeat the last step every time you make changes in cPanel to sync them with your GitHub repository.

This method requires manual updates in cPanel after every change, but it can be practical. Another approach, which skips using a virtual repository like GitHub, involves direct SSH connection to cPanel, which we will cover in the future.

Good luck!
